## Rule of Law

Under the federal venue statute, 28 U.S.C. § 1391(b)(2), if the defendants in a federal diversity action do not reside in the same state, venue is proper in any district where a substantial portion of the events giving rise to the action occurred.

## Facts

Thompson (plaintiff) purchased a ticket from Pensacola, Florida, to Tunica, Mississippi, from Greyhound Lines, Inc. (Greyhound) (defendant) on March 14, 2011. The ticket provided that Thompson would arrive in Tunica at 5:05 p.m. on March 15, 2011. Thompson left Pensacola on a Greyhound bus and arrived in Mobile just after midnight. Thompson was then directed to another bus, which was going to Jackson, Mississippi, operated by Colonial Trailways (Colonial) (defendant). The bus driver, Terry Reeves (defendant), told Thompson that another bus would take him to Tunica from Jackson. The bus planned to return to Mobile after stopping in Jackson. Thompson fell asleep, missed the stop in Jackson, and was returned to Mobile. Thompson sued Greyhound, Colonial, and Reeves in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Alabama, invoking diversity jurisdiction. Reeves was a Florida resident. Thompson alleged that he missed a court date due to the actions of Greyhound, Colonial, and Reeves. Greyhound moved to dismiss the action based on improper venue and for failure to state a claim.

## Issue

Under the federal venue statute, 28 U.S.C. § 1391(b)(2), if the defendants in a federal diversity action do not reside in the same state, is venue proper in any district where a substantial portion of the events giving rise to the action occurred?

## Holding and Reasoning (Steele, J.)

Yes. If the defendants do not reside in the same state, venue in federal diversity action is proper in any district where a substantial portion of the events giving rise to the lawsuit occurred. Venue in federal diversity actions is governed by 28 U.S.C. § 1391(b). Under that statute, venue is proper in a district in which any defendant resides, if all defendants are residents of the same state. 28 U.S.C. § 1391(b)(1). Venue is also proper in a judicial district in which a substantial part of the events or omissions giving rise to the claim occurred. 28 U.S.C. § 1391(b)(2). In this case, Reeves is a resident of Florida, not Alabama. Therefore, 28 U.S.C. § 1391(b)(1) does not establish venue. The only event that occurred in the southern district of Alabama was Thompson’s transfer from the Greyhound bus to the Colonial bus. This transfer does not constitute a substantial part of the events that gave rise to the breach of contract or negligence claim. However, venue would be proper in the southern district of Mississippi, because a substantial part of the events giving rise to the claim occurred there. Thompson was driven there, Reeves did not wake Thompson up there, and Greyhound sold the ticket to transport Thompson through there. Generally, cases filed in districts in which venue is not proper should be transferred to a district in which venue would be proper. 28 U.S.C. § 1406(a). Greyhound has not presented any explanation for why the case should be dismissed rather than transferred. Accordingly, the case is transferred to the Southern District of Mississippi.