## Rule of Law

(1) Adults with mental disabilities are generally held to the same standard of care as that of a reasonable person under the circumstances, without regard to their capacity to control or understand the consequences of their actions.

(2) Institutionalized Alzheimer's patients with no capacity to control their conduct do not owe a duty to their professional caregivers to refrain from violent behavior.

## Facts

Lloyd Rusk (defendant) suffered from advanced-stage Alzheimer's disease, which caused him to suffer intense confusion, memory loss, anxiety, depression, and agitation. When Rusk's wife became unable to care for him, she admitted him to a nursing home at which Carol Creasy (plaintiff) worked as a nursing assistant. Creasy's responsibilities included caring for Rusk and other Alzheimer's patients. Rusk's disease often made him belligerent, combative, and aggressive toward nursing-home staff as they attempted to care for him. One evening, Creasy knew that Rusk had been particularly violent and aggressive. As Creasy and another nursing assistant attempted to put Rusk to bed, Rusk kicked Creasy several times in the knee and hip. Creasy was injured, and she brought a negligence claim against Rusk seeking damages for her injuries. The trial court granted summary judgment in Rusk's favor, but the appellate court reversed. The Indiana Supreme Court granted transfer and reviewed the case.

## Issue

(1) Are adults with mental disabilities generally held to the same standard of care as that of a reasonable person under the circumstances, without regard to their capacity to control or understand the consequences of their actions?

(2) Do institutionalized Alzheimer’s patients with no capacity to control their conduct owe a duty to their professional caregivers to refrain from violent behavior?

## Holding and Reasoning (Sullivan, J.)

(1) Yes. Adults with mental disabilities are generally held to the same standard of care as that of a reasonable person under the circumstances, without regard to their capacity to control or understand the consequences of their actions. There are several policy reasons for holding a person with mental disabilities to a reasonable-person standard of care. First, the rule allocates the loss between two innocent parties to the party who caused the harm. Second, the rule provides an incentive for the people who are responsible for caring for a mentally disabled person to take necessary steps to prevent harm to others, including restraining the person if he or she presents a danger. Third, the rule removes any incentive for a tortfeasor to feign a mental disability to avoid liability. Fourth, the rule remedies the difficulty that factfinders face in attempting to evaluate the impact of a potential tortfeasor’s mental disability. Moreover, because state and national policy seek to promote equality between disabled persons and those without disabilities, the rule holds the mentally disabled responsible if they are to engage themselves in society.

(2) No. Institutionalized Alzheimer's patients with no capacity to control their conduct do not owe a duty to their professional caregivers to refrain from violent behavior. Although the general rule holds mentally disabled adults to a reasonable-person standard of care, there are some circumstances in which a duty should not be imposed. In considering whether one party owes a duty to another party, courts examine factors including the parties’ relationship, the reasonable foreseeability of harm to the injured party, and public-policy concerns. Here, Rusk and Creasy had a patient-caregiver relationship. Rusk’s wife admitted him to the nursing home because she could not care for him due to his advanced Alzheimer’s, which made him unable to understand and control his violent behavior. As a caregiver in the nursing home, Creasy was employed to support patients in Rusk’s condition, and she assumed the risk that she could be injured by the conduct of patients in her care. Moreover, Creasy specifically knew about Rusk’s potential for danger given his disease and his previous violent conduct, and she was in a position to have prevented against the harm when she observed Rusk’s behavior on the night she was injured. As a matter of public policy, it would be inappropriate to impose a duty on Rusk when his potential for violence and inability to appreciate or control his conduct were the very reasons he was placed in the nursing home under the care of Creasy and the other staff members. Because Rusk owed no duty to Creasy, Rusk’s motion for summary judgment should have been granted. The appellate court’s judgment is vacated, and the trial court’s judgment is affirmed.