# Alaska Northern Development, Inc. v. Alyeska Pipeline Service Co.

Alaska Supreme Court

666 P.2d 33 (1983)

## Rule of Law

In order to exclude parol or extrinsic evidence regarding the inclusion of additional terms to a writing, the court must determine whether the writing in question was integrated and, if so, whether the extrinsic evidence at issue contradicts or is inconsistent with the integrated portion of the writing.

## Facts

Alaska Northern Development, Inc. (AND) (plaintiff) entered negotiations with Alyeska Pipeline Service Co. (Alyeska) (defendant) to purchase surplus parts. AND submitted a letter of intent to Alyeska on December 10, 1976. AND’s letter left out the price term of the agreement. Alyeska responded with its own letter of intent on December 11, 1976. Alyeska’s letter also left out the price term. Alyeska’s letter of intent stated that the agreement was “subject to the final approval of the owner committee.” The parties later agreed on a price term, and AND’s president signed Alyeska’s December 11th letter of intent. In March 1977, however, Alyeska’s owner committee rejected the proposed agreement described in the December 11th letter of intent. AND brought suit against Alyeska in Alaska state court alleging breach of contract and seeking reformation and punitive damages. AND argued that it interpreted the owner committee clause in the December 11th letter of intent as only providing the owner committee with the right to review the price term for reasonableness. Alyeska replied that it intended the owner committee clause as creating total authority within the owner committee to review and approve or disapprove the entire agreement. The trial denied AND’s request to submit extrinsic evidence to clarify the meaning of the owner committee clause. The trial court granted Alyeska’s motion for summary judgment, and AND appealed.

## Issue

Whether parol or extrinsic evidence regarding the inclusion of additional terms to a writing may be excluded if the writing in question is integrated and the extrinsic evidence at issue contradicts or is inconsistent with the integrated portion of the writing.

## Holding and Reasoning (Compton, J.)

Yes. The extrinsic evidence offered by AND to support its interpretation of the owner committee approval clause in its contract with Alyeska is inadmissible. In order to exclude parol or extrinsic evidence regarding the inclusion of additional terms to a writing, the court must determine whether the writing in question was integrated and, if so, whether the extrinsic evidence at issue contradicts or is inconsistent with the integrated portion of the writing. A writing is “integrated” when the parties intend that the writing be a final expression of one or more terms of their agreement. The intent of the parties is determined by the trier of fact by examining all the relevant evidence. If a writing is integrated, extrinsic evidence is not permissible to explain or supply any terms in the writing if the extrinsic evidence would contradict or be inconsistent with the integrated writing. “Inconsistency” is defined as the “absence of reasonable harmony in terms of the language and respective obligations of the parties.” After examining all of the evidence presented, the trial court held that the December 11th letter of intent exchanged between AND and Alyeska was integrated because it was intended by the parties to be a final expression of all the terms of their agreement except the price term. There is nothing in the record indicating that this finding was clearly erroneous. The December 11th letter does not indicate that the owner committee would only have authority to review and approve the price term. Rather, the letter specifically stated that the “agreement” itself was subject to the final approval of the owner committee. Since the December 11th letter of intent was integrated, AND may not introduce extrinsic evidence that is inconsistent with this interpretation of the owner committee approval clause. AND seeks to introduce extrinsic evidence showing that the owner committee’s approval powers were actually intended to extend solely to review of the price term. There can be no “reasonable harmony” between this interpretation of the term and the meaning of the term contained in the December 11th letter of intent (granting the owner committee ultimate approval over the entire agreement). Without “reasonable harmony in terms of the language and respective obligations of the parties,” AND’s extrinsic evidence must be considered inconsistent with the integrated December 11th writing and is thus inadmissible. The trial court properly excluded AND’s requested extrinsic evidence. The decision of the trial court granting Alyeska’s motion for summary judgment is affirmed.

#parolevidencerule 