## Rule of Law

A commercial contracting party cannot maintain claims for promissory estoppel and misrepresentation against the other contracting party for statements made within the scope of the contract if adequate contract remedies exist.

## Facts

All-Tech Telecom, Inc. (All-Tech) (plaintiff) contracted with Amway Corp. (defendant) to purchase a large number of TeleCharge phones, which were a new product and service intended for consumers in hotels and restaurants. After facing equipment problems and regulatory hurdles, the TeleCharge program failed, and the phones were withdrawn from the market. All-Tech sued Amway in a Wisconsin federal district court alleging intentional and negligent misrepresentation, promissory estoppel, and breach of warranty. All-Tech claimed that it was induced to enter and stay in the failing venture by Amway’s misrepresentations, including that Amway had thoroughly researched the TeleCharge program, that the service would be the best in the nation, that the service had been approved in all 50 states, that any business phone line could be used with TeleCharge, and that each phone would produce $750 in annual revenue for the distributor. The statements regarding regulatory approval of the service and the compatibility with any business phone line were corrected before All-Tech bought the TeleCharge phones. In addition, some of the statements were made by one of Amway’s distributors at a trade meeting. The district court granted summary judgment for Amway on the claims of intentional and negligent misrepresentation and promissory estoppel. The breach-of-warranty claim was allowed to go to the jury, which found for All-Tech but did not award damages. All-Tech appealed the district court’s grant of summary judgment on the misrepresentation and promissory-estoppel claims to the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit.

## Issue

May a commercial contracting party maintain claims for promissory estoppel and misrepresentation against the other contracting party for statements made within the scope of the contract if adequate contract remedies exist?

## Holding and Reasoning (Posner, C.J.)

No. A commercial contracting party may not maintain claims for promissory estoppel and misrepresentation if adequate contract remedies exist. Under the economic-loss doctrine, commercial contracting parties may not bring tort actions against one another for pecuniary losses if they could have protected themselves from the loss through their contract. If contractual remedies exist, tort remedies for misrepresentation are unnecessary, as they would duplicate the contractual remedies, add complexity to the law, and undermine contract law. Contract law has developed doctrines, such as the parol-evidence rule, to protect against juries attributing unpredictable meanings to contracts. Those protections are not present in tort law. The purpose of confining contracting parties to their contract remedies under the economic-loss doctrine is best demonstrated in product-warranty cases, in which a buyer has adequate remedies for a seller's breach of warranty under the Uniform Commercial Code. If the buyer were also permitted to pursue tort claims based on oral warranties, it would expose sellers to unreasonable risks that could otherwise be prevented under contract law. Here, the representations at issue are similar to warranties. Although Wisconsin has not yet decided whether the economic-loss doctrine applies in cases of intentional misrepresentation, this court need not decide that issue in this case because All-Tech has not presented evidence of misrepresentation. Some of the statements were corrected before All-Tech bought the TeleCharge phones. Those statements cannot form the basis of a misrepresentation claim because All-Tech learned the truth before making the purchase. Some of the statements were made by one of Amway’s distributors. However, the distributor is an independent contractor rather than an employee, and Amway is not legally responsible for the distributor's statements. Many other statements (_e.g._, that Telecharge is the "best") were simply sales patter or pure puffery, on which a reasonable person would not have relied. The remaining statements were either vague predictions, hypothetical, not material, or were not made at all. As to All-Tech’s remaining claim, the doctrine of promissory estoppel makes a promise enforceable if it is definite enough to cause a reasonable person to rely upon it. The promise must usually be a promise to do something in the future. Here, however, the promise that Amway had thoroughly researched the TeleCharge program is a promise as to a past or existing condition, and it is more appropriately described as a warranty. Promissory estoppel is intended to apply to promises not supported by consideration and not otherwise enforceable under conventional contract-law principles. If the promise emerges from an express contract and is supported by consideration, promissory estoppel does not apply. Here, the alleged warranty that All-Tech had researched the TeleCharge program was made within the scope of the contract between the parties, and promissory estoppel is therefore inapplicable. The district court’s grant of summary judgment is affirmed.