## Rule of Law

A mandatory arbitration provision added to a credit card agreement is binding upon a cardholder so long as the cardholder receives notice of the change.

## Facts

Obie Payton (defendant) signed a revolving credit card application with Beneficial National Bank, U.S.A. (Beneficial) (plaintiff). The application provided that Payton agree to the terms and conditions of the cardholder agreement, including a provision that allowed for subsequent changes to be made to the agreement by Beneficial. Beneficial subsequently notified its cardholders, including Payton, that it was adding a provision requiring mandatory arbitration in the event of any claim, dispute, or controversy unless Payton rejected the change within 30 days. Payton did not notify Beneficial within the time period required. Nearly two years later, Payton’s account with Beneficial was assigned to Household Bank (plaintiff). Cardholders were notified of the assignment by a billing insert which also included a provision requiring mandatory arbitration. Payton filed suit against Beneficial and Household Bank in state court claiming the mandatory arbitration provision was forced upon Payton by fraudulent misrepresentations and other wrongful conduct. Shortly thereafter, Household Bank and Beneficial filed suit in federal court to compel arbitration of Payton’s claims in accordance with § 4 of the Federal Arbitration Act (FAA) as provided for in the cardholder agreement. Payton moved to dismiss the suit for lack of subject matter jurisdiction. Beneficial and Household Bank moved to compel arbitration.

## Issue

Is a mandatory arbitration provision added to a credit card agreement binding upon a cardholder so long as the cardholder receives notice of the change?

## Holding and Reasoning (Lee, C.J.)

Yes. Payton argues that he never agreed to arbitrate any dispute with Beneficial because the original agreement he signed did not allow Beneficial the right to add new terms to the agreement. Rather, the agreement allowed Beneficial only the right to make changes to existing terms and conditions. In _Bank One v. Coates_, 125 F.Supp.2d 819 (S.D.Miss.2001), the court considered whether an arbitration provision could be subsequently added to an existing cardholder agreement. There, the court held that because the agreement specifically allowed the lender to change or amend the terms of the agreement, the addition of the arbitration provision was justified. Here, Payton claims that the agreement with Beneficial did not give the right to Beneficial to amend the agreement, only to change the existing terms. However, there is no practical distinction between a “change” and an “amendment” to the terms of the agreement. The agreement authorized Beneficial to “change the terms of the agreement,” which it did by mailing cardholders, including Payton, a notice of the change including the arbitration provision. Payton did not timely notify Beneficial that he rejected the change. Payton next argues that it is immaterial that he did not take affirmative steps to opt out of the mandatory arbitration provision because courts have held that acceptance of an arbitration agreement may not be binding based merely on a party’s failure to reject such an agreement. See _Long v. Fidelity Water Systems, Inc._, (N.D.Cal.2000). The court disagrees and finds Payton’s argument unpersuasive. Payton further argues that the arbitration provision cannot bind him because his state law claims against Beneficial and Household Bank involve acts that pre-date the purported effective date of the arbitration agreement. However, a number of courts have recognized that an arbitration agreement can apply to “all transactions occurring before or after the agreement,” or apply to “all transactions” between the parties. _Kenworth of Dothan v. Bruner-Wells Trucking, Inc._, 745 So.2d 271, 275 (Ala.1999). Here, while the Beneficial provision does not explicitly provide retroactive time-specific language, it is sufficiently broad enough to cover the dispute between the parties in the state court action. Finally, Payton asserts that the arbitration provision at issue is substantively unconscionable because it designates the National Arbitration Forum (NAF) as the arbitral forum. However, as stated in _Coates_, “the rules governing the conduct of NAF arbitrations belie [Payton’s] speculation that suspected bias by the NAF has any realistic potential for affecting decisions of arbitrators in NAF arbitrations.” Beneficial and Household Bank’s motion to compel arbitration is granted.