## Rule of Law

When the continuance of special circumstances appears from the terms of the contract to have been an assumption in the minds of the contracting parties conditioning their belief in a continued obligation, performance of that obligation is not excused by impossibility absent extreme or unavoidable circumstances.

## Facts

On December 27, 1927, Canadian Industrial Alcohol Co. (Canadian) (plaintiff) placed an order for approximately 1,500,000 gallons of molasses from Dunbar Molasses Co. (Dunbar) (defendant). Delivery of the molasses was to begin after April 1, 1928, and shipments were to be spread out during the warm weather. After April 1, 1928, Dunbar made periodic deliveries of a total of 344,083 gallons of molasses to Canadian. Dunbar stated that its failure to deliver more molasses to Canadian was due to a lack of willingness by Dunbar’s supplier, the National Sugar Refinery at Yonkers (refinery). Canadian brought suit in New York state court against Dunbar seeking damages for Dunbar’s failure to deliver the total amount of molasses ordered by Canadian. Dunbar argued that its duty to deliver was conditioned upon the production by the refinery of molasses in a sufficient quantity to fulfill Canadian’s order. Dunbar stated that its duty to supply molasses according to its contract with Canadian was discharged when the refinery reduced its output of available molasses. The trial court granted judgment for Canadian, and Dunbar appealed.

## Issue

When the continuance of special circumstances appears from the terms of the contract to have been an assumption in the minds of the contracting parties conditioning their belief in a continued obligation, may performance of that obligation be excused by impossibility absent extreme or unavoidable circumstances?

## Holding and Reasoning (Cardozo, C.J.)

No. The reduction in production of molasses by the refinery does not excuse Dunbar from its obligation to supply the agreed-upon amount of molasses to Canadian. When the continuance of special circumstances appears from the terms of the contract to have been an assumption in the minds of the contracting parties conditioning their belief in a continued obligation, performance of that obligation is not excused by impossibility absent extreme or unavoidable circumstances. Extreme or unavoidable circumstances excusing performance based on impossibility may include “acts of God” such as storms or natural disasters that destroy crops or facilities, outbreaks of war, and unavoidable labor strikes, among others. Dunbar asserts that one of the assumptions in the mind of the contracting parties conditioning their belief in a continued obligation was the ability of the refinery to produce molasses in sufficient quantities to permit Dunbar to fulfill Canadian’s order. Dunbar thus argues that Canadian should have expected that if the refinery lowered its molasses output, Dunbar would not fulfill the contract as written due to impossibility. There is no evidence to support Dunbar’s claim, however. Nothing in the record suggests that Dunbar would have been unable to fulfill Canadian’s order by making a timely contract with the refinery to produce the requisite amount of molasses. In reality, Dunbar did not make or even attempt to make such a contract with the refinery. Additionally, no evidence suggests that Dunbar ever informed Canadian that no such contract had been made with the refinery, or that no attempt to make such a contract would be later made. Dunbar blindly trusted that the refinery would continue producing its typical amount of molasses, but made no contract to ensure this would be the case. There is thus no evidence that Dunbar’s breach of its contract with Canadian was due to extreme circumstances or an unavoidable “act of God.” Rather, Dunbar breached the contract due to its failure to plan sufficiently and make a separate contract with the refinery. Under these facts, Dunbar is not entitled to excuse of performance of its contract with Canadian due to impossibility. The decision of the trial court is affirmed.