## Rule of Law

An obligor's performance may not be excused on the grounds of impracticability if the event on which the obligor relies to excuse performance is something that the parties foresaw at the time they entered into their contract.

## Facts

Timothy Dills (plaintiff), a private developer, contracted to purchase and develop a tract of land from the Town of Enfield, Connecticut (Enfield) (defendant) for $985,900. Dills paid a $100,000 deposit to Enfield. The parties' contract provided that Enfield would convey the property to Dills 60 days after the fulfillment of two conditions: (1) the submission and approval of final construction plans as specified by the contract and (2) Dills's submission of evidence of sufficient mortgage financing. The contract also included two termination provisions. The first allowed Dills to reclaim his $100,000 deposit and terminate the contract if he failed to obtain mortgage financing. The second allowed Enfield to keep Dills’s deposit and terminate the contract if Dills failed to submit acceptable final construction plans. Dills submitted preliminary construction plans to Enfield. However, Dills never submitted acceptable final construction plans because, even though he had tried diligently, he was unable to obtain mortgage financing. Both Dills and Enfield tried to terminate the contract under the termination provisions. On December 19, 1974, Enfield voted to terminate the contract and keep Dills's deposit because Dills had failed to submit acceptable final construction plans. On December 22, 1974, Dills’s attorney notified Enfield that Dills was terminating the contract because he was unable to obtain mortgage financing. Enfield refused to return Dills’s deposit, and Dills sued Enfield to recover the deposit in Connecticut state court. The case was referred to a state referee. The referee concluded that Dills was excused from performance due to impracticability because he was unable to obtain financing. The referee therefore recommended that Dills be allowed to recover his deposit. The trial court disagreed with the referee and entered judgment for Enfield. Dills appealed to the Connecticut Supreme Court.

## Issue

May an obligor's performance be excused on the grounds of impracticability if the event on which the obligor relies to excuse performance is something that the parties foresaw at the time they entered into their contract?

## Holding and Reasoning (Peters, C.J.)

No. An obligor's performance may not be excused on the grounds of impracticability if the event on which the obligor relies to excuse performance is something that the parties foresaw at the time they entered into their contract. For a party's performance to be excused based on impracticability, the party must demonstrate, among other things, that (1) a supervening event or contingency made performance of the party's contractual obligations impracticable, and (2) the nonoccurrence of the event was a basic assumption on which the contract was made. The event or contingency must have been truly unforeseen at the time of contract formation. In determining whether the non-occurrence of a particular event was a basic assumption on which the contract was made, the court assesses which party assumed the risk of the event’s occurrence, considering all of the circumstances and the terms of the contract. If the contract expressly places the risk of occurrence on one of the parties, then the doctrines of impossibility and impracticability are irrelevant. Here, Dills asserts that his inability to obtain mortgage financing made performance of the contract impracticable. However, there is no evidence suggesting that Dills's possible failure to obtain mortgage financing was an unforeseen event. The parties discussed this possibility at length and even included a termination clause in the contract to be invoked in case the event occurred. Due to the parties’ foresight to include the termination clause for lack of financing in the contract, it cannot be concluded that Dills’s failure to obtain financing was “an event the non-occurrence of which was a basic assumption on which the contract was made.” That Dills might be unable to obtain mortgage financing was foreseeable, and Dills still made an unqualified promise to perform. Dills thus assumed the risk of the occurrence of a foreseeable event and incurred an obligation to perform even if the foreseeable event occurred. Dills has not met his burden of demonstrating that he should be excused from performance based on impracticability. The trial court's decision is affirmed.