## Rule of Law

If a contract contains an express condition, nonperformance of the condition by one party relieves the other party of his own contractual obligations.

## Facts

Dove (plaintiff) was employed by Rose Acre Farms, Inc. (Rose Acre) (defendant), a construction company. Rose Acre’s president, Rust, created an incentive program that involved paying bonuses to employees for certain positive acts, and assessing penalties against employees for failing to complete basic job expectations. The purpose of the bonus program and penalties was to discourage absenteeism and tardiness by employees, and to promote motivation and dependability. Under the terms of the bonus program, if an employee was late for one minute or missed one day of work, he would forfeit the opportunity to earn a bonus. In June 1979, Rust gave Dove and other construction workers the opportunities to earn a bonus of $6,000 each if they completed a certain construction project within 12 weeks. The bonus agreement was later modified to offer Dove $5,000 if he completed the project in 10 weeks, to accommodate Dove’s school schedule. Dove was aware that this arrangement required him to work 12 hours per day, five days per week. Dove was also aware that if he missed any work or was tardy one day, he would forfeit the opportunity for the bonus. Dove completed his duties under the arrangement for nine weeks. During the tenth week, Dove came down with strep throat and a high fever. Dove told Rust he could not work. Rust offered him the opportunity to stay there and lie on a couch, or make up missed days on the weekend. Dove declined and missed two days of work during the tenth week of the bonus program. Rust refused Dove the bonus because Dove missed two days of work. Dove brought suit against Rose Acre in Indiana state court, arguing that he substantially performed the bonus agreement and thus should be awarded the full bonus. The trial court entered judgment for Rose Acre, and Dove appealed.

## Issue

If a contract contains an express condition, does nonperformance of the condition by one party relieve the other party of his own contractual obligations?

## Holding and Reasoning (Neal, J.)

Yes. Dove did not perform the condition required for obtaining the bonus from Rose Acre, and thus Rose Acre is not liable for breach of contract in failing to pay Dove the bonus. When a contract contains an express condition, nonperformance of the condition by one party relieves the other party of his own contractual obligations. A contract containing an express condition that is not fulfilled may, however, still be enforced if there is evidence that the party seeking deny enforcement of the contract acted with fraud or bad faith, or contrary to public policy. When Dove agreed to the express terms of the bonus agreement, he was well aware of Rust’s strict policies relating to absenteeism and tardiness. Participation in the bonus program was not a requirement of Dove’s job, but was merely an extra incentive if Dove wanted to perform extra work for compensation. If Dove found the terms of the bonus program to be too strict or arduous, he could have simply declined to participate and kept his normal job. Rust’s stated purpose of using the bonus programs was to discourage absenteeism and tardiness, and thus this objective was central to the bonus agreement Rust made with Dove. Dove did not comply with the express condition in the bonus agreement when he missed two days of work due to illness. There is no evidence that Rose Acre acted with any fraud or bad faith when making the agreement with Dove, and there are no public policy arguments that demonstrate why the bonus agreement should not be enforced as agreed between the parties. Dove’s argument that the agreement should be enforced as made between the parties due to his impossibility of performance from illness is rejected. A party seeking to be removed from performance obligations under a contract due to impossibility may not then sue the other party to the contract for nonperformance. Dove’s lack of performance of his portion of the bonus agreement relieves Rose Acre from liability to pay the bonus to Dove as agreed. The decision of the trial court is affirmed.