

United States District Court, Eastern District of Michigan

2007 WL 674321 (2007)

## Facts

In May 2002, DTE Energy Technologies, Inc. (DTE) (plaintiff), a Michigan corporation, began negotiations with a hospital for the sale of electric generator systems to be used in Hoag’s construction project. Hoag’s general contractor instructed DTE to negotiate the sale with a subcontractor. Briggs Electric, Inc. (Briggs) (defendant) won the subcontract. On October 21, 2003, Briggs sent DTE a purchase order requesting electric generator systems. On November 10, 2003, DTE forwarded an email to Briggs that DTE’s president had previously sent to the hospital. The email indicated DTE’s intent to accept Briggs’ offer to purchase the products contained in its purchase order. On December 4, 2003, DTE sent an order acknowledgement to Briggs. Attached to the order acknowledgement was a list of standard terms containing a forum selection clause. The forum selection clause was not part of Briggs’ original purchase order, and required all potential disputes between Briggs and DTE to be resolved under Michigan law, by a Michigan court. After this correspondence, DTE sues

## Procedure
DTE brought suit against Briggs in Michigan state court on the ground that Briggs breached its contractual obligation to pay DTE $880,000 for electric generator systems provided by DTE. Briggs submitted a demand for mediation of its dispute with DTE, as well as a declaration of the rights and obligations of both parties in a California court. Briggs argued that its purchase order sent on October 21, 2003 constituted an offer, and that DTE accepted the offer via conduct when it emailed Hoag on November 10th. DTE argued that its order acknowledgement containing the forum selection clause, sent on December 4, 2003 constituted an offer, and that Briggs is contractually bound by the forum selection clause. Briggs states that it did not agree to the forum selection clause, and thus should not be bound by its terms.

## Issue

Whether, under UCC §2-207, a written confirmation of an offer may be treated as a rejection or counteroffer if it contains additional or different terms from the offer, and is expressly made conditional on the original offeror’s assent to the additional or different terms.

## Holding and Reasoning (Duggan, J.)

Yes. DTE’s written confirmation of Briggs’ did not state that it was expressly made conditional on Briggs’ assent to the new forum selection clause contained in the confirmation, and thus the new clause is unenforceable against Briggs. Under UCC §2-207, a written confirmation of an offer may be treated as a rejection or counteroffer if it contains additional or different terms from the offer, and is expressly made conditional on the original offeror’s assent to the additional or different terms. UCC §2-207 is intended to apply only to an acceptance which clearly indicates that the offeree will not proceed with the transaction unless he receives the offeror’s assent to additional terms in the written confirmation. If the acceptance is not expressly conditional on the offeror’s assent to the additional or different terms, those new terms are to be construed as proposals for additions to the contract. In the absence of an exception outlined in UCC §2-207, those additional proposed terms automatically become part of the contract if both contracting parties are merchants. One exception in UCC §2-207, however, states that the additional proposed terms will not automatically becomes part of the contract, even if both parties are merchants, if they would materially alter the terms of the parties’ original contract. Briggs’ purchase order, sent on October 21, 2003, is an offer to purchase electric generator systems from DTE. It contains sufficiently definite quantity, price, and delivery terms to constitute a firm offer. Since Briggs’ made this offer, DTE’s order acknowledgement, sent in response on December 4, 2003, operates as a written confirmation of Briggs’ offer, rather than an offer itself. DTE’s order acknowledgement contains a forum selection clause not present in Briggs’ original offer, and the standard terms attached to the order acknowledgement indicate that DTE intended the forum clause to be binding on Briggs with or without Briggs’ assent to this additional term. Under UCC §2-207, the forum selection clause could be construed as a proposal for addition to the contract between DTE and Briggs since both parties are merchants. It is not automatically made a part of the contract, however, since the forum selection clause requiring resolution of disputes under Michigan law by Michigan courts materially alters the terms of the contract. As adding the forum selection clause to the contract would materially alter its terms, the clause is not added to the original contract between DTE and Briggs and is thus unenforceable against Briggs.

#UCC #merchants 