# Heights Realty, Ltd. v. Phillips

New Mexico Supreme Court

749 P.2d 77 (1988)

## Rule of Law

Mental incapacity at the time of contract formation may void the existence of a contract.

## Facts

Heights Realty, Ltd. (Heights) (plaintiff) entered into an exclusive listing contract with Johnye Mary Gholson (Gholson) (original named defendant). In 1984, Gholson telephoned Pat Eichenberg, a real estate broker and the owner of Heights, to secure Heights’ services in selling Gholson’s property. At this time, Gholson was eighty-four years old. On September 26, 1984, Gholson signed a contract listing the property for one year at $250,000 with a $75,000 cash down payment. No other terms were included in the contract. On October 10, 1984, Gholson changed her mind about the down payment and signed an addendum increasing the down payment amount to $100,000. In November 1984, an offer was made to purchase Gholson’s property for $255,000. Gholson did not accept that offer. Heights brought suit against Gholson for the commission it allegedly earned for finding a buyer for Gholson’s property. During the proceedings, Gholson was adjudicated incompetent, and Phillips (defendant), Gholson’s son-in-law, was appointed conservator of her estate. At trial, Heights argued that the contract it made with Gholson was enforceable because she did not lack the mental capacity to contract at the time of contract formation. Based on testimony received from expert psychiatrist witnesses, Gholson’s relatives, and Gholson herself, the trial court held Gholson did not have the capacity to enter the leasing contract with Heights. The trial court thus held the contract invalid, and Heights appealed.

## Issue

Whether mental incapacity at the time of contract formation may void the existence of a contract.

## Holding and Reasoning (Stowers, J.)

Yes. Gholson lacked the mental capacity to contract at the time of contract formation with Heights, and thus the listing contract between Gholson and Heights is void. Mental incapacity at the time of contract formation may void the existence of a contract. The test of mental capacity is whether a person is capable of understanding in a reasonable manner the nature and effect of the act in which the person is engaged. There is a presumption of competency in every person. To overcome this presumption, the person asserting incapacity has the burden of demonstrating by clear and convincing evidence a lack of mental capacity in the contracting party at the time of contract formation. This burden remains with the person alleging incapacity unless the person alleged to be incompetent was already declared incompetent prior to the contract. Even if a person was previously declared incompetent, however, he may still uphold the validity of the contract by proving that at the time of contract formation, he was experiencing a “lucid interval.” Evidence of a person’s condition before or after contract formation is admissible as proof of his condition at the time of making the contract. The determination of a person’s competency is ultimately a question of fact that must be determined by the trial court based on all the evidence presented in the case. At trial, Heights’ expert psychiatrist witness, Dr. Farber, said that he did not examine Gholson and thus could not say that she was incompetent. Gholson’s own psychiatrist, Dr. Muldawer, testified that he examined Gholson and began seeing a general decline in her cognitive skills around 1979 or 1980. Gholson’s granddaughter, Louise Loomis, also testified that around 1979 or 1980, Gholson began having problems comprehending matters. Finally, Gholson’s son-in-law, Phillips, testified that Gholson was “constantly confused” and had been in a period of general cognitive decline since the death of her husband in 1959. Gholson herself testified that she chose to list her property at $250,000 by guessing at the value of the property. She did not have the guidance of family or a lawyer, and left open all the other material terms to the contract. Gholson testified that she did not remember signing the October 10, 1984 addendum because she “couldn’t think of anything in sequence at that time.” Based on the entirety of this evidence, especially testimony by Gholson’s family members who knew her well and observed her repeatedly, the trial court concluded that Gholson was lacked mental competency at the time of making the contract with Heights. This conclusion is supported by the record. Based on all the information presented at trial, Gholson’s presumption of competence is overcome by clear and convincing evidence. The contract between Gholson and Heights is invalid, and the decision of the trial court is affirmed.

#mentalincapacity #voidcontract