## Rule of Law

An employment having no specified term may be terminated at the will of either party by providing notice to the other party.

## Facts

Hillesland (plaintiff) was a long-term senior employee of Federal Land Bank Association of Grand Forks (Association) (defendant). Through his position, Hillesland learned that Ray and Eva Westby, customers of the Association, wanted to sell their property to a third party. Hillesland contacted the Westbys to offer financial counseling. Through a series of events, the Westbys ended up selling their property to Hillesland’s sons. The Federal Land Bank of St. Paul (the Bank) (defendant) launched an investigation of the circumstances based on an apparent conflict of interest cause by Hillesland. When the investigation concluded, the Bank informed Hillesland that his employment was being terminated because he had violated written standards of conduct, had damaged the image and reputation of the Association and the Bank, and had exercised poor business judgment. Hillesland brought suit in North Dakota state court alleging violation of provisions of the Farm Credit Act, breach of contract, age discrimination, and tortious interference by the Bank with Hillesland’s employment contract with the Association. The trial court granted summary judgment for the Association and the Bank on all of Hillesland’s claims. Hillesland appealed. On appeal, the appellate court first dismissed all Hillesland’s claims involving the Farm Credit Act, age discrimination, and tortious interference by the Bank with Hillesland’s employment contract. The appellate court then considered in depth Hillesland’s breach of contract claim.

## Issue

May an employment having no specified term be terminated at the will of either party by providing notice to the other party?

## Holding and Reasoning (Erickstad, C.J.)

Yes. Hillesland was an at-will employee and was not improperly terminated by the Association and the Bank. An employment having no specified term may be terminated at the will of either party by providing notice to the other party. While the classic “at-will employment” doctrine states that an employer may terminate an employee “for good cause, for no cause or even for cause morally wrong,” several jurisdictions have adopted several exceptions to this rule that provide increased protection for employees. The first exception is the public policy exception, which allows a discharged employee to recover if his termination violates a well-established and important public policy. The second exception is only recognized by a few jurisdictions, and involves the imposition of an implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing into the employment contract. This second exception effectively transforms every employment contract into an agreement to terminate only for good cause. The discretion of the employer to terminate an at-will employee is severely limited. North Dakota courts follow the holding of the Supreme Court of Washington in _Thompson v. St. Regis Paper Co._, 685 P.2d 1086-1087 (1984). In _Thompson_, the Supreme Court of Washington declined to recognize an implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing in every employment contract, finding that doing so would remove an employer’s contractual right to terminate his employees at-will. The Supreme Court of Washington also reasoned that imposing such a covenant would significantly interfere with the collective bargaining process between employers and employees. This holding by the Supreme Court of Washington is codified in North Dakota law in Section 34-03-01, N.D.C.C., which provides that an employment having no specified term may be terminated at the will of either party by providing notice to the other party. The Association and the Bank had no implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing imposed in their employment contract with Hillesland. Hillesland’s employment contract itself provided no guarantees or representations that Hillesland was anything other than an at-will employee. Finally, there is no indication that the Association and the Bank acted in violation of any public policy. Hillesland’s termination without cause was proper, and the decision of the trial court is affirmed.