## Rule of Law

If a contractual provision is clearly and unambiguously labeled as a condition precedent, the provision will not be treated as a warranty instead.

## Facts

In June 1954, Kardon (buyer) (plaintiff) opened negotiations to purchase the Edwin J. Schoettle Co. and five of its subsidiaries (defendants) (sellers). On September 17, 1954, the parties entered a written agreement providing that the buyer would purchase the sellers for $2,100,000. Of this amount, $187,863.60 would be set aside to be held by an escrow agent to indemnify the buyer against any liabilities of the sellers. The written agreement, which was drafted by counsel, provided “warranties” offered by the sellers to the buyer and “conditions precedent” impacting the buyer’s rights at the time of closing. Section 5(g) of the written agreement, titled “Representations and Warranties,” stated that since June 30, 1954, there had not been “any changes in [sellers’] financial condition, assets, liabilities, or businesses, other than changes in the ordinary course of business, none of which [had] been materially adverse.” Section 9 of the agreement was titled “Conditions Precedent.” Section 9(a) of the agreement, titled “Financial condition at closing,” stated that “as of the time of closing the financial condition of the [sellers] shall be no less favorable than the financial condition shown on the statements of [sellers] dated June 30, 1954.” Section 10 of the agreement provided for indemnification of the buyer by the sellers for “any damage or deficiency resulting from any misrepresentation, breach of warranty, or nonfulfillment of any agreement on the part of [the sellers].” The buyer brought a claim for $69,998.42 from the escrow fund alleging that the financial condition of the sellers on the date of purchase was less favorable than that reflected in the companies’ financial statement of June 30, 1954. The buyer argued that section 9(a) of the agreement operated as a “warranty” against this fact and entitled him to reimbursement from the escrow fund for the sellers' loss in value. The sellers argued that section 9(a) was not a warranty, but rather was a “condition precedent” that functioned to relieve the buyer of his obligation to consummate the sale if the condition was not fulfilled. The sellers argued that when the buyer went through with the sale, he waived the condition in 9(a). The dispute was submitted to arbitration, and the arbitrator awarded $3,182.88 to the buyer. Judgment in this amount was entered for the buyer, and the buyer appealed.

## Issue

If a contractual provision is clearly and unambiguously labeled as a condition precedent, may the provision be treated as a warranty instead?

## Holding and Reasoning (Jones, J.)

No. If a contractual provision is clearly and unambiguously labeled as a condition precedent, the provision will not be treated as a warranty instead. Rather, the unambiguous contractual language of the parties will be enforced as written. If a condition precedent is not fulfilled but the parties continue with the agreement anyway, the condition and any rights created by it are waived. In this case, attorneys for the buyer and the sellers carefully and meticulously negotiated and drafted the agreement between the buyer and the sellers. They clearly labeled section 5 of the agreement, which contained the warranties offered by the sellers, as “Representations and Warranties.” Additionally, the attorneys clearly labeled section 9 of the agreement, which contained the conditions precedent that would impact the buyer’s rights at closing, as “Conditions Precedent.” Section 5 contains an express warranty by the sellers that no changes had occurred in their businesses other than those common in the ordinary course of business. Because this provision was purposely and unambiguously contained in the “Representations and Warranties” section, it must be treated as a warranty. In contrast, Section 9 states that the obligations of the buyer at closing are subject to the condition that no changes in the value of the sellers had occurred between the companies’ financial statements and the date of closing. This statement was unambiguously and purposely placed within the “Conditions Precedent” section and thus must be enforced as a condition precedent. Section 9(a) offers the buyer the right to be relieved from the obligation to consummate the sale if any unfavorable financial conditions occur beyond those which are covered by the sellers’ warranty in section 5(g). The buyer claims that the financial condition of the sellers has deteriorated beyond that which would occur in the ordinary course of business. This is a situation covered by section 9(a) of the agreement, not section 5(g). Thus, the buyer’s claim is limited to the remedies of the buyer available for failure of a condition precedent to occur. The buyer may only be relieved of his obligation to consummate the sale, rather than recover for the decrease in the sellers’ value from the escrow fund. The buyer waived the condition precedent in 9(a) when he accepted the agreement and is not now entitled to indemnification from the sellers. The decision of the arbitrator and lower court is affirmed.