# In re Katrina Canal Breaches Litigation

United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit

495 F.3d 191 (2007)

## Rule of Law

Insurance contract terms should be construed according to their plain, ordinary, and generally prevailing meaning, and unambiguous insurance contract terms should be enforced as written.

## Facts

On August 29, 2005, Hurricane Katrina hit New Orleans, Louisiana, and caused significant water damage to most of the city. This litigation represents over forty separate suits by plaintiffs suing their insurance companies. All plaintiffs hold insurance policies with “flood exclusions.” Hanover Insurance Company (Hanover), Standard Fire Insurance Company (Standard Fire), and Unitrin Preferred Insurance Company (Unitrin) (defendants) provide insurance coverage to most of the plaintiffs (collectively, Vanderbook plaintiffs). These policies exclude coverage for “Water Damage, meaning:…Flood, surface water, waves, tidal water, over-flow of a body of water, or spray from any of these, whether or not driven by wind…” Mary Jane Silva (plaintiff) and Robert G. Harvey, Sr. (plaintiff) were insured by State Farm Fire and Casualty Company (“State Farm”). State Farm provided a similar insurance policy and flood exclusion to that provided by Hanover, Standard Fire, and Unitrin. The only difference is that State Farm prefaced its flood exclusion by saying that the exclusion applied to water damage arising “from natural or external forces.” After Hurricane Katrina, Hanover, Standard Fire, Unitrin, and State Farm denied coverage to the plaintiffs holding policies with flood exclusions. The Vanderbrook plaintiffs, Silva, and Harvey brought suit against Hanover, Standard Fire, Unitrin, and State Farm in federal district court, seeking to enforce their insurance policies. The plaintiffs argued that the term “flood” was ambiguous in their insurance policies. The plaintiffs argued that because the water damage was caused by an inundation of water from canals due to the breaking of man-made levees during Hurricane Katrina, the damage should not be considered the result of a “flood” and should thus be covered by their insurance companies. The district court held that the term “flood” in the Hanover, Standard Fire, and Unitrin policies was ambiguous as it could be interpreted as referring to water damage from either natural or unnatural causes. The district judge held that these different types of “floods” should be treated differently and based on the ambiguity in the insurance policies, denied the motions to dismiss of Hanover, Standard Fire, Unitrin. The district judge did not find ambiguity, however in State Farm’s flood exclusion policy because of its lead-in statement saying that the exclusion applied to damage from “natural or external forces.” The district judge granted State Farm’s motion to dismiss. All plaintiffs appealed.

## Issue

Should insurance contract terms should be construed according to their plain, ordinary, and generally prevailing meaning, and unambiguous insurance contract terms be enforced as written?

## Holding and Reasoning (King, J.)

Yes. The terms of the flood exclusions in the plaintiffs’ insurance policies are unambiguous and the water damage to their property is not covered by insurance. Insurance contract terms should be construed according to their plain, ordinary, and generally prevailing meaning, and unambiguous insurance contract terms should be enforced as written. When an insurance policy includes ambiguous provisions, the ambiguity must be resolved by construing the policy as a whole. Under the reasonable expectations doctrine, ambiguity regarding the terms in an insurance contract may be resolved by ascertaining how a reasonable insurance policy purchaser would construe terms in the insurance policy at the time the insurance contract was entered. The plaintiffs maintain that their policies’ flood exclusions do not unambiguously exclude coverage for losses caused by an inundation of water resulting from a negligently designed, constructed, or maintained levee. First, the plaintiffs argue that the term “flood” in the exclusions is ambiguous and thus the policies should be construed in favor of coverage. The fact that a term used in an insurance policy exclusion is not defined in the policy itself does not make the exclusion ambiguous, however. Rather, the term will be construed according to its plain and generally prevailing meaning. Based on information gathered from various dictionaries, encyclopedias, treatises, and case law, the term “flood” is general construed as meaning an “inundation of water” resulting from the “overflow of a body of water, whether natural or artificial.” This is exactly what occurred in New Orleans as a result of Hurricane Katrina causing the levees to break and thus inundate plaintiffs’ property with overflow from the canals. Second, the plaintiffs rely on several cases in which insurance policies containing flood exclusions were construed as providing coverage in the event of water damage from broken water mains. Courts have been reluctant to classify damage from a broken main as a “flood.” These cases are not controlling in the present case, however, as the inundation of water caused by Hurricane Katrina was significantly greater from the amount generally released by a broken water main. Third, plaintiffs’ argument that damage caused by a broken man-made levee is caused by man and thus should not be classified as “flood damage” is rejected. Levees are flood-control structures, which by definition implies that they will interact with “floodwaters.” When a levee breaks and causes water damage, the damage can only be described as a “flood.” Drawing a distinction between “natural” and “unnatural” floods would ultimately create too many limits on insurance companies’ liability for water damage caused by broken levees. This is because man-made levees that break could always be described as causing “unnatural” damage, regardless of whether a “natural” event caused the man-made structure to break. This is an absurd result. Finally, plaintiffs’ argument that under the reasonable expectations doctrine, they could reasonably have been expected to interpret their flood exclusion policies as only applying to “natural” and not “man-made” floods is rejected. The reasonable expectations doctrine is only available when the terms of an insurance policy are ambiguous. Based on the facts of this case and the generally prevailing definitions and usages of the word “flood,” the flood exclusions in plaintiffs’ insurance policies are not ambiguous and must be enforced as written. Water damage caused by Hurricane Katrina was a “flood,” and is thus unambiguously excluded from coverage under the plaintiffs’ insurance policies. The decision of the district court is reversed.