## Rule of Law

Sufficient consideration for an enforceable contract exists when one party agrees to do something or refrains from doing anything that he has a right to do, regardless of whether doing so causes any actual detriment to him or confers any actual benefit upon the other party.

## Facts

Langer (plaintiff) was employed as a superintendent at Superior Steel Corp. (Superior) (defendant). When Langer was about to retire from his position, Superior sent him a letter offering him a pension of $100 per month in exchange for Langer agreeing not to seek employment with any of Superior’s competitors. Langer accepted these terms and did not seek competitive employment. Superior paid Langer $100 per month for four years, after which it notified Langer that it would no longer make payments. Langer brought suit in Pennsylvania state court seeking to enforce the terms of the contract. Superior argued that the letter was not an enforceable contract, but merely a gratuitous promise. The trial court entered judgment for Superior, and Langer appealed.

## Issue

Does sufficient consideration for an enforceable contract exist when one party agrees to do something or refrains to do anything that he has a right to do?

## Holding and Reasoning (Baldrige, J.)

Yes. Langer’s act of refraining from seeking competitive employment constitutes sufficient consideration for an enforceable contract with Superior. Sufficient consideration for an enforceable contract exists when one party agrees to do something or refrains from doing anything that he has a right to do, regardless of whether doing so causes any actual detriment to him or confers any actual benefit upon the other party. While consideration is typically evidenced by one party conferring a benefit upon the other party in exchange for a promise, it may also exist when one party merely refrains from acting in some manner. The act of refraining from doing something which the party has a legal right to do is itself a detriment to him, and is thus sufficient consideration for an enforceable contract. Consideration does not exist when one party merely attaches a condition to a gift, with no promise offered by the recipient party in exchange. Such an agreement is a gratuitous promise and cannot be enforced. Superior promised Langer the monthly payment of $100 in exchange for Langer’s promise to refrain from seeking competitive employment elsewhere. Langer’s act of refraining from seeking other employment is to his detriment, as he is giving up potential wages from working for another company. It is also a benefit to Superior, as Langer’s knowledge of the trade and Superior’s business practices are not being used by a competitor to negatively impact Superior’s benefit. Langer’s act of incurring a detriment to himself and conferring a benefit upon Superior constitutes sufficient consideration offered in exchange for Superior’s promise to make this an enforceable contract. Even if this were not the case, the contract could be enforced on a theory of promissory estoppel. Promissory estoppel is an equitable remedy which permits enforcement of even a gratuitous promise if the promisee incurs a definite and substantial detriment while relying on the promise, and injustice can only be avoided by enforcing the promise. Langer incurred a definite and substantial detriment by forgoing other employment in reliance on Superior’s promise. Thus, even if no consideration existed to support an enforceable contract, Superior’s promise could still be enforced on a theory of promissory estoppel. This is unnecessary, however, as Langer’s act of refraining from seeking competitive employment constitutes sufficient consideration for an enforceable contract with Superior. 

## Judgement:
The decision of the trial court is reversed and remanded.