## Rule of Law

A merchant party to a contract may only seek contract modification by acting in good faith, meaning conduct that is consistent with reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing in the trade, and motivation by an honest desire to compensate for commercial exigencies.

## Facts

In November 1972, Roth Steel Products (Roth) (plaintiff) contracted to purchase 200 tons of “hot rolled” steel per month from Sharon Steel Corp. (Sharon) (defendant) at $148.00 per ton through December 1973. Sharon also indicated that it could sell hot rolled steel at $140.00 per ton on an open schedule basis. Finally, Sharon offered to sell up to 500 tons of “cold rolled” steel at varying prices. In early 1973, the market price for steel and the demand for steel production both drastically increased. In March 1973, Sharon notified Roth that it was increasing the price of steel and would no longer honor the prices it quoted in November 1972. After negotiations, the parties agreed that Roth would continue paying the contract price for steel until June 30, 1973, and would pay an increased price following that date through the end of 1973. Sharon informed Roth that if it refused to pay these higher prices, Sharon would cease supplying steel to Roth entirely. Roth did not want this modification, but reluctantly agreed because Sharon supplied a substantial amount of Roth’s steel and Roth believed it had no other reasonable alternative supplier. During 1974 and 1975, Sharon only accepted orders for steel from Roth “at the price prevailing at the time of shipment.” Sharon’s deliveries were increasingly late, which Sharon justified by stating that there was a shortage of raw materials. In reality, Sharon was reserving large quantities of rolled steel for sale to a subsidiary at premium prices. 


## Procedure 

Roth brought suit in federal district court against Sharon for breach of contract. The district court found that Sharon acted in bad faith by using its position as the chief supplier of Roth’s steel to force Roth to agree to the contract modification in 1973. The district court held the contract modification was unenforceable, and awarded damages to Roth. Sharon appealed.

## Issue

Whether a merchant party to a contract may only seek contract modification by acting in good faith, meaning conduct that is consistent with reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing in the trade, and motivation by an honest desire to compensate for commercial exigencies.

## Holding and Reasoning (Celebrezze, J.)

Yes. Sharon did not act in good faith when seeking modification of its contract with Roth, and is thus liable for breach of contract. A merchant party to a contract may only seek contract modification by acting in good faith, meaning conduct that is consistent with reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing in the trade, and motivation by an honest desire to compensate for commercial exigencies. To demonstrate conduct that is consistent with reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing in the trade, the party seeking enforcement of a contract modification must show that his decision to seek modification was the result of a factor, such as increased costs, which would cause an ordinary merchant in the industry to seek modification of the contract. To demonstrate honesty in fact regarding motivation for seeking the modification, the party seeking to modify the contract must show that he was motivated by a legitimate commercial reason and that such a reason is not offered merely as a pretext. Additionally, the party seeking to enforce the modification must not have engaged in extortion or coercive means to obtain the modification. Sharon argues that its decision to seek contract modification was consistent with reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing in the steel industry because market conditions would cause further performance of the contract to result in a substantial economic loss to Sharon. The evidence supports Sharon’s argument. Sharon’s cost of raw materials, including slabs of raw steel, increased dramatically after it made the 1972 contract with Roth. Additionally, the fact that Sharon negotiated a contract with Roth under which it would earn only a slim profit margin does not indicate that Sharon was willing to absorb a loss by continuing to perform the contract once the market changed. Finally, although Sharon’s total profits on all its products increased, it actually experienced a loss on its sales of steel even under the modified contract with Roth. Thus, Sharon’s conduct in seeking the contract modification with Roth is consistent with reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing. Sharon did not, however, act in good faith when it sought the modification. Sharon wrongfully forced Roth to accept the unfavorable modification by threatening to cease its supply of steel to Roth entirely if Roth would not pay the increased prices. At trial, Sharon argued that it was justified in increasing the price of steel after sending a letter to Roth on November 17, 1972 indicating that it was raising prices in accordance with a general industry-wide price increase. In its negotiations with Roth, however, Sharon never offered this information as justification for its conduct in seeking the contract modification. Rather, Sharon threatened to stop supplying steel to Roth if Roth would not agree to pay higher prices. This conduct indicates a lack of honesty in fact, as well as an attempt by Sharon to induce Roth to enter into a contract through improper means. The modification of the contract between Sharon and Roth is unenforceable, and Sharon is liable for breach of contract. The decision of the district court is affirmed in part and reversed in part.