## Rule of Law

(1) Whether an agreement is unconscionable must be decided on a case-by-case basis, and depends on whether at the time of execution the contract provision could result in unfair surprise and was oppressive to the other party; and (2) A merchant seeking to terminate a business agreement must act in good faith by practicing honesty in fact and observing reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing.

## Facts

Zapatha (plaintiff) is a former foreman and operations manager of an electroplating company. In May 1973, after almost twenty years of service, Zapatha was terminated from his position. Zapatha explored owning his own business, and spoke to Dairy Mart, Inc. (Dairy Mart) (defendant) about opportunities to franchise. On November 8, 1973, Dairy Mart approved Zapatha's franchise ownership and presented him with a franchise agreement. 

- The agreement contained a termination clause providing that after twelve months, either Zapatha or Dairy Mart could terminate by providing ninety days’ written notice. The agreement also provided that if Dairy Mart terminated the agreement without cause, it would be required to purchase all of the Zapatha’s remaining inventory at eighty percent of market value. Dairy Mart ensured Zapatha read and understood all terms in the franchise agreement, and advised him to have it looked over by a lawyer. Zapatha did not consult a lawyer, and signed the franchise agreement containing the termination clause. 
- In November 1977, Dairy Mart presented Zapatha with a new and more detailed franchise agreement. Some of the terms of the new agreement were less favorable for Zapatha, but others were possibly more favorable. Zapatha informed Dairy Mart that he would not sign a new agreement.
-
- On January 20, 1978, Dairy Mart gave written notice to Zapatha that it was terminating their franchise agreement within ninety days. Dairy Mart agreed to purchase all Zapatha’s remaining inventory at eighty percent of market value. Zapatha brought suit against Dairy Mart in Massachusetts state court, alleging the termination clause in the franchise agreement was unconscionable and that Dairy Mart’s conduct was unfair and deceptive. The trial court held for Zapatha. Dairy Mart appealed.

## Issue

1) Does the unconscionability of an agreement depend on whether at the time of execution the contract provision at issue could result in unfair surprise and was oppressive to the allegedly disadvantaged party; and 2) Whether a merchant seeking to terminate a business agreement must act in good faith by practicing honesty in fact and observing reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing in that trade.

## Holding and Reasoning (Wilkins, J.)

Yes. The termination clause in the agreement between Dairy Mart and Zapatha is not unconscionable, and there is no evidence that Dairy Mart acted improperly or in bad faith when it terminated the agreement. Whether an agreement is unconscionable must be decided on a case-by-case basis and depends on whether at the time of execution of the agreement, the contract provision at issue could result in unfair surprise and was oppressive to the allegedly disadvantaged party. Thus, a termination clause providing for termination without cause is not unconscionable per se, but will be held unconscionable if it could result in unfair surprise or was oppressive. Additionally, a merchant seeking to terminate a business agreement must act in good faith by practicing honesty in fact and observing reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing in that trade. The sole test of “honesty in fact” is “whether the person was honest.” Even if a business agreement permits termination by one or both parties without cause, courts may decline to permit termination if the party seeking termination acted in bad faith. The termination clause in the agreement between Dairy Mart and Zapatha has no potential for unfair surprise to Zapatha. Zapatha confirmed that he read and understood all of the agreement’s terms. Zapatha gave up his right to have a lawyer examine the document. Zapatha sought out the Dairy Mart franchise opportunity because he was terminated from his previous employment and was seeking a more secure opportunity. Thus, the termination provision in his new agreement was of particular interest to him. Someone with Zapatha’s background and business experience should not have been surprised by the termination clause, and even if he was, the surprise was not unfair. Additionally, Dairy Mart did not act oppressively by including the termination clause in its franchise agreement with Zapatha. The only investment required by Zapatha in taking over the franchise agreement was the purchase of inventory. If Dairy Mart terminated the agreement without cause, Dairy Mart was required under contract to purchase all Zapatha’s remaining inventory at eighty percent of market value. This arrangement was not unfair to Zapatha. Dairy Mart presented Zapatha with a clear agreement outlining its right to terminate the franchise agreement without cause. When Dairy Mart terminated the agreement, it did so legally and without bad faith. The decision of the trial court is reversed.