## Facts

Helen Palsgraf (plaintiff) was standing on a platform owned by the Long Island R.R. (railroad) (defendant). While she was waiting to catch a train, a different train bound for another destination stopped at the station. Two men ran to catch the train as it was moving away from the station. One of the men was carrying a package that, unbeknownst to anyone on the platform, contained fireworks. The first man jumped aboard the train safely, but the man with the package had difficulty. Two train employees helped the man get on the train. However, in the process, the man dropped the package. It fell to the rails and exploded, causing several scales at the other end of the platform to dislodge and injure Palsgraf. Palsgraf brought suit against the railroad for negligence. The trial court granted judgment for Palsgraf, and the appellate division affirmed. The railroad appealed to the New York Court of Appeals.

## Issue

Does a defendant owe a duty of care to a plaintiff if the plaintiff is not in the zone of reasonably foreseeable harm resulting from the defendant's actions?

## Holding and Reasoning (Cardozo, C.J.)

No. Negligence liability is predicated on the breach of a duty owed by the defendant to the plaintiff. The scope of a defendant's duty is defined by the scope of the reasonably foreseeable harm resulting from the defendant's actions. If someone is outside of the range of the reasonably foreseeable consequences of the defendant's actions, the defendant generally does not owe that person a duty, and the person therefore may not bring a negligence action against the defendant. The range of reasonably foreseeable harm may be a question either for the court or for a jury to decide. Moreover, with regard to identifying the appropriate scope of negligence liability, a plaintiff may not sue on behalf of the risk of injury or bodily harm perpetrated against another; rather, the plaintiff may only recover for harm committed against the plaintiff's own person or property. Here, the railroad employees were attempting to help the man with the package safely board the train. The man suffered no bodily injury in the process, and to the extent he suffered any harm at all, it was only the damage to the package. If anyone could potentially bring a negligence action against the railroad, it would be the man, but he is not doing so. Rather, Palsgraf is bringing an action for her own bodily harm based on the events set in motion when the package dropped. However, this harm to Palsgraf was not reasonably foreseeable. From the outside, the package gave no indication that it contained fireworks; it looked harmless. Given the package's appearance, even if a railroad employee had knowingly and deliberately thrown the package down, this could not be seen as an unlawful act that would put Palsgraf in danger. The consequences should not be more severe for the employee's unintentional conduct. Because the harm to Palsgraf was outside the realm of reasonably foreseeable consequences from the railroad employees' actions, there is no basis for negligence liability in this matter. The decision of the appellate court is reversed.

## Dissent (Andrews, J.)

The railroad employee negligently caused a package full of explosives to fall from the arms of a man he was helping. Negligence is an act or omission which unreasonably does or may affect the rights of others. It is incorrect to state that one only has a duty to protect some individuals from the consequences of wrongful acts. One does not only have a legal duty to protect those in a nearby “zone of danger” from harmful acts; rather, one has a duty to protect society at large. Phrased differently, everyone owes the general public the duty of refraining from acts that may unreasonably threaten the safety of others. However, this is not enough to support a theory of recovery for damages against a negligent defendant. To recover damages, the defendant’s negligent act must have been the proximate cause of the plaintiff’s injury. This means that there is a natural and continuous sequence between cause and effect, with few if any intervening causes. In the case of Palsgraf’s injuries, she was standing on the train platform when the railroad employee negligently dropped the package. But for his dropping the package and it exploding, Palsgraf would not have been injured. There is thus a natural and continuous sequence of events between dropping the package and the injury, with no intervening events. The judgment against the railroad should be affirmed.