## Rule of Law

A church protesting a military funeral on public land in a peaceful manner is considered public speech protected by the First Amendment.

## Facts

Fred Phelps (defendant), founder of the Westboro Baptist Church (defendant), organized a picket and protest of a military funeral held in Maryland. Phelps and several members of his congregation stood holding signs outside the Maryland State House, U.S. Naval Academy, and the church where the funeral took place. The signs stated phrases such as “Thank God for 9/11,” “America is Doomed,” “Thank God for IEDs,” and “Thank God for Dead Soldiers.” Albert Snyder (plaintiff), the father of the fallen soldier, noticed the Westboro picketers but could not read the content on the signs. Snyder filed suit against Phelps, the church, and the other protestors (collectively Defendants) in federal district court alleging five state tort law claims including intentional infliction of emotional distress (IIED). At trial, it was shown that Phelps had notified local authorities in advance of the protest and had complied with police instructions in staging the demonstration. The protestors occupied a 10- by 25-foot plot of public land approximately 1,000 feet from the church where the funeral was held. There was no evidence of violence, yelling, or other disruptive behavior during the 30 minute protest period before the funeral. Snyder testified that although he did not see what was written on the picketers’ signs, he had suffered severe depression and emotional anguish. A jury found for Snyder on the IIED claim an awarded him $2.9 million in compensatory damages and $8 million in punitive damages. The district court lowered the punitive damages amount to $2.1 million but affirmed the jury’s verdict in all other respects. The Defendants appealed. The court of appeals reversed and held that the protest was protected by the First Amendment. The U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari to review.

## Issue

Is a church protesting a military funeral on public land in a peaceful manner considered public speech protected by the First Amendment?

## Holding and Reasoning (Roberts, C.J.)

Yes. In Maryland, a plaintiff alleging a claim of intentional infliction of emotional distress (IIED) must demonstrate that the defendant intentionally or recklessly engaged in extreme and outrageous conduct that caused the plaintiff to suffer severe emotional distress. Here, Defendants claim that their right to freedom of speech under the First Amendment shields them from liability for IIED. Whether Defendants are liable turns on whether the claimed speech is private or public in nature. If the speech is public, the First Amendment provides greater protection than if the speech is private. Private speech typically does not implicate issues of public importance that often warrant heightened protection. The Court has held that speech is of public concern when it relates to any matter of political, social, or other community concern or when it is the subject of legitimate news interest and value to the public. _See_ _Connick v. Myers_, 461 U.S. 138, 146 (1983); _San Diego v. Roe_, 543 U.S. 77, 83-84 (2004). Despite the arguable inappropriate or controversial nature of the content on the picket signs, the issues they raise relate to matters of public interest and concern. They highlight political and moral conduct of the United States and its citizens. Synder argues that because the protest took place in connection with his son’s private funeral the speech is a matter of private concern. However, merely because the Defendants protested a private funeral does not by itself transform the nature of the speech to a matter of private concern. Although the speech hurt Snyder during a time of personal loss, the church’s members picketed peacefully 1,000 feet from the church on public land. Moreover, church members picketed public sites like the Maryland State House and the U.S. Naval Academy. Even though public speech is protected by the First Amendment, it is not limitless. Public speech is still subject to reasonable time, place, or manner restrictions and is not protected when it occurs outside a personal residence or an abortion clinic entrance. The judgment of the court of appeals is affirmed.

#IIED #protest