## Rule of Law

A plaintiff who has been wrongfully confined to a limited area without legal authority may bring a tort claim for false imprisonment.

## Facts

In November 1996, Karl Cockrell (plaintiff) was detained by Raymond Navarro, a loss-prevention officer, while Cockrell was attempting to leave a retail store owned by Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. (Wal-Mart) (defendant). Navarro asked Cockrell to follow him into a manager’s office, where Navarro asked Cockrell to take down his pants and remove his shirt. Cockrell had a large bandage covering a surgical wound on his stomach, and Navarro asked Cockrell to remove the bandage as well. Two additional Wal-Mart employees were in the office when Cockrell was forced to remove the bandage. Finding no evidence of theft, Navarro apologized and allowed Cockrell to leave. Following the incident, Cockrell suffered mental anguish and became withdrawn. Cockrell eventually brought a claim of false imprisonment against Wal-Mart. At trial, Cockrell’s parents testified that Cockrell refused to leave the house following the incident and that his relationship with his father suffered. The jury returned a verdict for Cockrell and awarded $300,000 in damages. Wal-Mart appealed the decision.

## Issue

May a plaintiff who has been wrongfully confined to a limited area without legal authority bring a tort claim for false imprisonment?

## Holding and Reasoning (Dorsey, J.)

Yes. A plaintiff who has been wrongfully confined to a limited area without legal authority may bring a claim for false imprisonment. Under _Randall’s Food Markets, Inc. v. Johnson_, 891 S.W.2d 640 (Tex. 1995), the elements of false imprisonment are (1) a willful detention, (2) without consent, and (3) without legal authority. In this case, Navarro testified that he had Cockrell in his custody when Cockrell was detained in the Wal-Mart office. Two additional Wal-Mart employees accompanied Cockrell and Navarro into the office, and Cockrell reasonably believed that he could not leave. As a result, the facts were sufficient to support the jury’s finding that Cockrell was willfully detained without his consent. Regarding the third element of the test, there is a special exception that allows one person to detain another when the detaining person reasonably believes that the detained person has stolen or is attempting to steal property. This is known as the shopkeeper’s privilege, and grants a person legal justification to detain the suspected thief in a reasonable manner for a reasonable amount of time to investigate ownership of the property. Here, Navarro testified that he suspected Cockrell because he had seen Cockrell acting suspiciously and observed a bulge under Cockrell’s shirt. However, Navarro had not seen Cockrell take any merchandise, and the jury could rationally find that Navarro’s suspicions of theft were unreasonable. Additionally, the evidence supports the jury’s determination that Navarro did not detain Cockrell in a reasonable manner. Although a person may make a contemporaneous search of a suspect’s person under the shopkeeper’s privilege, Navarro’s search under the bandage was unreasonable because there was no probable cause to believe that anything was hidden underneath the bandage. Wal-Mart also argues that there is no evidence to support the $300,000 jury award based on Cockrell’s mental anguish. Generally, recovery for mental anguish requires evidence of a high degree of mental pain and distress beyond mere anxiety or embarrassment. Here, there was evidence that requiring Cockrell to remove his bandage caused him severe and lasting mental anguish, because Cockrell became withdrawn after the incident and his relationship with his father suffered. In summary, there was sufficient evidence to support both the jury’s finding of false imprisonment and the jury’s award of damages. Accordingly, the trial court’s judgment is affirmed.

#falseimprisonment 