## Rule of Law

Personal jurisdiction over a party is proper if the party engaged in conduct purposely directed at the forum state.

## Facts

Helen Abdouch (plaintiff) was the executive secretary of the Nebraska presidential campaign of John F. Kennedy in 1960. Richard Yates gave Abdouch a copy of his book, _Revolutionary Road_, in 1963 with the inscription: “For Helen Abdouch–with admiration and best wishes. Dick Yates. 8/19/63.” The book was eventually stolen. Ken Lopez (defendant), through his company, Ken Lopez Bookseller (KLB) (defendant), purchased the book in 2009 from a seller in Georgia. Lopez and KLB then sold the book the same year to a buyer outside Nebraska. KLB buys and sells rare books and manuscripts. KLB sells these items through catalogs and on a website. The website contains advertisements and an inventory. Individuals can browse the inventory and purchase books through the website. KLB advertised the Yates book, designated as “SOLD,” with a photo of the inscription on the website for more than three years after the book was sold. KLB attends various antiquarian book fairs, but KLB has not attended any book fairs in Nebraska. Only two of approximately 1,000 individuals on KLB’s active mailing list lived in Nebraska. KLB was not registered to do business in Nebraska and did not own or lease any real estate in Nebraska. KLB did not advertise in any Nebraska publications and had sold less than $615 in books to Nebraska residents from 2009–2011. During that time, KLB’s total sales were $3.9 million. Abdouch discovered that Lopez and KLB posted the photo of the inscription on the website and sued Lopez and KLB in Nebraska for invasion of privacy.
The trial court dismissed the lawsuit based on a lack of personal jurisdiction over Lopez and KLB. Abdouch appealed to the Supreme Court of Nebraska.

## Issue

Is personal jurisdiction over a party proper if the party engaged in conduct purposely directed at the forum state?

## Holding and Reasoning (McCormack, J.)

Yes. Personal jurisdiction over a party is proper if the party engaged in conduct purposely directed at the forum state. There are two tests that are applicable to this case. The first is the sliding-scale test regarding the operation of a website based on the level of interactivity. If the website involves entering into contracts and the knowing and repeated transmission of computer files over the internet, personal jurisdiction is proper. If the website simply posts information, the website cannot be the basis for personal jurisdiction. If the website falls in between these two categories of interactivity, the level of the interactivity and the nature of the website must be examined. _Zippo Mfg. Co. v. Zippo Dot Com., Inc._, 952 F. Supp. 1119 (W.D.Pa. 1997). Here, the website was interactive and allowed customers to browse and purchase books. However, the level of interaction with Nebraska was minimal, and no evidence was presented that showed that the website was directed toward Nebraska. The second test looks to the effects of the alleged tortious conduct. If the defendant’s acts were intentional, uniquely or expressly aimed at the forum state, and caused harm in the forum state, personal jurisdiction is proper. _Calder v. Jones_, 465 U.S. 783 (1984). This test examines whether the defendant knew and intended the consequences of its actions to be felt in the forum state. No evidence was presented that Lopez or KLB directed the advertisement at Nebraska. Therefore, the judgment of the trial court is affirmed.