## Rule of Law

The citizenship of a real estate investment trust should be determined according to the citizenship of its shareholders.

## Facts

A group of corporations that manufactured food products (collectively, the plaintiff corporations) (plaintiffs) stored products in an underground warehouse owned by Americold Realty Trust (Americold) (defendant). After a warehouse fire destroyed products owned by the plaintiff corporations, the plaintiff corporations filed a lawsuit against Americold in Kansas state court alleging violations of state contract law. The plaintiff corporations were citizens of Delaware, Nebraska, and Illinois. Americold, a real estate investment trust, was organized under Maryland law. Americold removed the case to federal district court on diversity-jurisdiction grounds. The district court ruled in favor of Americold. The plaintiff corporations appealed. The court of appeals held that the district court’s exercise of jurisdiction over the case was improper because diversity of citizenship did not exist between Americold and the plaintiff corporations. The court of appeals reasoned that the citizenship of Americold, a noncorporate legal entity, depended on the citizenship of its members—meaning, in this case, its shareholders. Because no evidence of the citizenship of its shareholders was presented, Americold had failed to show that diversity of citizenship existed. The United States Supreme Court granted certiorari.

## Issue

Should the citizenship of a real estate investment trust be determined according to the citizenship of its shareholders?

## Holding and Reasoning (Sotomayor, J.)

Yes. The citizenship of a real estate investment trust should be determined according to the citizenship of its shareholders. A federal court may exercise diversity jurisdiction over a case arising under state law if the amount-in-controversy requirement is met and there is diversity of citizenship among all plaintiffs and all defendants. A corporation is a citizen of the state where it was incorporated and the state where its principal place of business is located. The citizenship of a noncorporate legal entity is determined based on the citizenship of its members. The members of a noncorporate legal entity depend on the entity’s form. For example, the members of a partnership are its partners, and the members of a union are the workers affiliated with it. A real estate investment trust is a noncorporate legal entity. Though it has the term trust in its title, a real estate investment trust is not a traditional trust, whose citizenship is determined according to the citizenship of its trustee. Rather, the members of a real estate investment trust are its shareholders, who have membership interests and votes in the trust. Therefore, for diversity-jurisdiction purposes, the citizenship of a real estate investment trust should be determined according to the citizenship of its shareholders. Here, Americold is a real estate investment trust. Despite being organized under the laws of Maryland, its citizenship depends on the citizenship of its shareholders. Because Americold did not present evidence about the citizenship of its shareholders when it removed the case filed by the plaintiff corporations to federal court, Americold has not established diversity of citizenship between it and the plaintiff corporations. It was improper for the district court to exercise diversity jurisdiction over the case. The judgment of the court of appeals is affirmed.