## Rule of Law

People of African descent brought to the United States and held as slaves, as well as their descendants (either slave or free), are not considered citizens of the United States and are not entitled to the protections and rights of the Constitution.

## Facts

Dred Scott (plaintiff) was an African American man born a slave in Virginia in the late 1700s. In 1830, he was taken by his owners to Missouri and purchased by Army Major John Emerson in 1832. Emerson took Scott with him on various assignments in Illinois and Wisconsin Territory, areas that outlawed slavery based on Congress’s enactment of the Northwest Ordinance of 1787 and the Missouri Compromise of 1820. While in Wisconsin, Emerson allowed Scott to marry and later left Scott and his wife in Wisconsin when he was reassigned to Louisiana. While in Louisiana, Emerson married Eliza Irene Sandford. He then sent for Scott and his wife, who traveled to Louisiana to serve Emerson and his wife. After Emerson’s death in 1843, his widow inherited his estate, including Scott. Scott attempted to purchase his freedom from Emerson’s widow, but she refused. In 1846, Scott sued Emerson’s widow for the freedom of himself and his family, but the Missouri Supreme Court upheld their slavery. Scott brought suit again in 1853 in federal district court against John Sandford (defendant), executor of Emerson’s estate. The federal court relied on Missouri law to find that Scott was still a slave, and the Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed. Scott petitioned for certiorari in the United States Supreme Court.

## Issue

Whether Scott, a person of African descent who was born a slave but later taken by his owner to live in free states with the intent of becoming a permanent resident, was considered a citizen of the United States and entitled to all the rights and privileges of the United States Constitution.

## Holding and Reasoning (Taney, C.J.)

No. In deciding that Scott and other persons of African descent, whether currently slaves or free, are not citizens of the United States and thus not entitled to Constitutional protections, an analysis is made starting with the characterization of persons in this category by the Framers of the Constitution. The inquiry is necessarily limited to a class of persons that include only those whose ancestors are of the African race, imported into the United States, and sold as slaves. At the time the Framers drafted the Constitution, the prevailing view in the United States was that people of African descent imported into the country as slaves were an inferior race and therefore not entitled to basic Constitutional protections, rights, and freedoms. Regardless of its own disagreement with this classification, the judiciary’s role is not to judge the wisdom of the policy, but rather to interpret the application of the Constitution as it was written. It does not necessarily follow that a person is entitled to all the protections afforded to a citizen of the United States because someone is a citizen of a particular state. The history and plight of African Americans is very different from that of Native Americans, as the latter have always been considered free and independent residents of the United States. While there is no difficulty extending constitutional protections to Native Americans, African Americans, brought as slaves to the United States have never been afforded the same status and consideration. Applying these principles to the present case, although the Framers’ language in the Declaration of Independence stated that “all men are created equal,” the prevailing negative view of African Americans at the time of the Declaration’s drafting meant that the Framers could not have intended those words to apply to African Americans. People of African descent were brought to the United States as property and were always considered as such in subsequent years. The factual record suggests that Dred Scott is still considered property and a citizen of Missouri, where he resides. The Circuit Court of Appeals has no jurisdiction to consider his claim because he does not have citizenship rights which include the right to sue in state or federal courts. Finally, the Congressional Acts that abolished slavery in the northern States of Illinois and Wisconsin where Scott had lived are themselves unconstitutional. Thus, neither Dred Scott nor his family is made free by being carried into these states by their owner with the intention of becoming a permanent resident. The decision of the court of appeals is affirmed.