## Rule of Law

A corporation’s principal place of business, for federal diversity jurisdiction purposes, refers to the place where the corporation’s high level officers direct, control, and coordinate the company’s activities.

## Facts

Friend, an employee with Hertz Corporation (Hertz) (defendant), and a number of other Hertz employees (collectively Plaintiffs) filed a class action suit against their employer alleging that the rental car company had failed to conform to California’s wage and hour laws. Alleging that the Plaintiffs and it were from different states, Hertz sought to remove the case to federal court. 28 U.S.C. §§ 1332(d)(2), 1441(a). Plaintiffs argued that Hertz’s principal place of business was located in California because it derived more revenue from that state than from any other state and the majority of its business activities were conducted in California. The district court agreed with Plaintiffs and found Hertz to be a citizen of California. Hertz appealed and the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed. The U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari to review.

## Issue

Does a corporation’s principal place of business, for federal diversity jurisdiction purposes, refer to the place where the corporation’s high level officers direct, control, and coordinate the company’s activities?

## Holding and Reasoning (Breyer, J.)

Yes. The federal diversity jurisdiction statute provides that a “corporation shall be deemed to be a citizen of any State in which it has been incorporated _and of the State where it has its principal place of business_.” 28 U.S.C. § 1332(c)(1). (emphasis added). The respective circuits have reached different conclusions regarding the statute and more specifically the determination of where a corporation has its principal place of business. The Court holds that the phrase “principal place of business” refers to the place where the corporation’s high level officers direct, control, and coordinate the corporation’s activities. Many courts have called this location the company’s “nerve center.” The “nerve center” is likely where the company’s headquarters is located and where the President, Chief Executive Officer, and other high-ranking company officials coordinate the company’s activities. There are three considerations that support the company’s “nerve center” being its principal place of business for federal diversity jurisdiction purposes. First, the plain language of the federal diversity jurisdiction statute supports it. Second, the “nerve center” approach is simple and easy to apply. Courts often spend excess time and money attempting to determine where a company’s principal place of business is located. Those lower-court decisions often lead to inconsistent results, produce appeals, and lead to reversals of decisions. Third, the federal statute’s legislative history offers supportive guidance. There, the Judicial Conference rejected a proposal that a corporation would be deemed a citizen of the State that accounted for more than half of its gross income as being too complex and impractical to apply. The judgment of the court of appeals is vacated and the matter is remanded for further proceedings consistent with the opinion.